Abendstern Game Modes

1. Deathmatch (DM)
  Every player is an enemy with every other.
  No rounds.
  Perfect radar.
  Respawn after 15 seconds.
  Winner is the one with most points
2. X-Team Deathmatch (XTDM)
  Players organised into X teams.
  No rounds.
  Perfect radar.
  Respawn after 15 seconds.
  Points awarded to team on enemy kills.
  Winner is team with most points.
3. Last-Man-Standing (LMS)
  Every player is an enemy with every other.
  Rounds; end when one or zero players remain.
  Respawn at beginning of round.
  Perfect radar.
  Point bonus to last surviver.
  Winner is the one with most points.
4. Last-of-X-Teams-Standing (LXTS)
  Players organised into X teams.
  Rounds; end when one or zero players remain.
  Perfect radar.
  Respawn at beginning of round.
  Points awarded to team on enemy kills.
  Bonus points to surviving team.
  Winner is team with most points.
5. X-team Capture the Flag (XCTF)
  Players organised into X teams.
  No rounds.
  Respawn after 7 seconds, or 15 on suicide.
  Respawn in confined areas arranged radially.
  Team flags placed in respawn areas.
  To score, a player runs over the enemy flag and takes it back to his.
  Can only score if own flag is in base.
  If the flag carrier is destroyed, the flag remains in his position until
  another enemy picks it up (and carries it) or an owner hits it, which
  teleports it back to base.
  Bonus points awarded to player and team on flag capture.
  Winner is team with most points.
6. Keep The Flag (KTF)
  Every player is an enemy with every other.
  No rounds.
  Respawn after 3 seconds, or 15 on suicide.
  Perfect radar
  Single flag placed randomly.
  Player begins to carry flag when he hits it.
  When carrier destroyed, flag remains in location of death until picked up.
  No points for kills.
  Carrier receives one point for every second he carries the flag.
  Winner is player with most points.
7. X-team Centre-of-Gravity (XCOG)
  Players organised into X teams.
  No rounds.
  Respawn after 10 seconds, or 15 on suicide.
  Respawning in designated areas, which are control points (CPs).
  Respawn occurs in a randomly-selected CP that the player's team controls.
  There are 1+3*X CPs arranged in a spoked graph, each spoke being three
  nodes long (not including the centre)
  The presence of a living ship of a certain team increases that team's control
  of that point by that ship's mass per second, and decreases other teams'
  control by the same amount. This only occurs if that team either owns this
  CP or owns a CP adjacent to it. Control is capped to a maximum.
  The team with the most control of a CP is considered to own it.
  At the beginning, each team is assigned a spoke and has full control over all
  its CPs, and no team has any control over the centre.
  When a team has no CPs left, all living players of that team immediately die;
  all players are transfered to the reamining teams at random.
  Winner is the team with the most CPs when the game ends; in case of tie, the
  tie is broken based on the sum of the team's per-player points.
8. X-team Spacial Control (XSC)
  Mostly the same as XCOG. Differences below.
  CPs replaced by regular grid which covers entire field (ie, every ship will
  always be present in exactly one control area (CA)).
  Grid size is (X*2)x(X*2).
  Non-suicide respawn is instant if death occurred within owned CA.
  Respawn always occurs in CA adjacent to a CA with less-than-perfect control,
  if this is possible (ie, respawn on the front lines).
  Initial ownership of CAs chosen completely at random, but giving each team
  exactly the same number of CAs.
9. Humans vs Cyborgs (HVC)
  Players organised into humans (mutually neutral) and cyborgs (allies).
  Initially N/4 (rounded up) cyborgs, all others human.
  Rounds; end when one or zero humans remain.
  Respawn after 15 seconds.
  If human killed by cyborg or suicide, reassigned to cyborg team.
  Perfect radar.
  Players awarded points for cross-species kills (human-human is neutral and
    cyborg-cyborg is negative).
  Bonus points to last human remaining.
  Winner is player with most points.
10. Warlord (WLRD)
  Each player on his own team.
  Initially, all players mutually hostile.
  When a player is non-team-killed, he becomes subordinate to the player who
    killed him, including any subordinates he has.
  All direct and indirect subordinates and superiors are friendly; players in
    the same tree but which are not subordinate or superior to each other are
    neutral.
  No points for kills; suicide and team-kills release all subordinates to the
    next owning player (or nobody, if the suicider or team-killer is
    top-level). Neutral-kills have no effect.
  On enemy-kill death, all the player's direct subordinates are released and
    become direct subordinates of the killer.
  Rounds; at the end of each round, each player receives one point for each
    direct subordinate of theirs, and a quarter point for each indirect
    subordinate (rounded down).
  Each round ends when one player owns the entire tree.
  10 rounds; winner is the player with the most points thereafter.
11. Point Race (RACE)
  Every player is an enemy of every other
  "Starting gate" is 5-screen-radius circle at centre of map
  All players initially spawn here
  Respawn is instant, except for suicide, which is 5 seconds
  Respawn occurs in same location where player died
  Number of checkpoints placed in space randomly
  Each checkpoint is guarded by a non-player ship ("the guardian")
  A player can only activate a checkpoint after getting a primary kill on the
    guardian
  Winner is first player to touch all checkpoints and then the starting gate
12. Strategy mode (SGTY)
